The primary aim of the proposed research is to contribute to the exploration
of the ‘Relativized Metaphysical Modality’ (RMM) program. The central doctrine
of RMM is that ‘modal perspective’ is fundamentally involved in a variety of
phenomena of central interest to analytic metaphysics: namely, phenomena for
which intuitition supports a metaphysics of ‘bounded naturalism’, such that
the limits on metaphysical possibility are somehow ‘generated’ by a
combination of abstract, intelligible principles and concrete, brute
categorical facts. Talk of the ‘generation’ of limits on metaphysical
possibility cannot be understood as involving matters ‘beyond’ the limits of
metaphysical possibility, because nothing lies beyond these limits: but having
recognized the orthogonal ‘as-actual’ and ‘as-counterfactual’ dimensions of
modal perspective, we can make sense of the limits of the ‘as-counterfactual’
covarying with options for the ‘as-actual’.

Phenomena supportive of bounded naturalism are widespread in metaphysics,
ranging from the analysis of law and chance, to the comprehension of
individual essence, to the determination of counterfactual truth, to the
ontogenesis of the domain of individuals and propositions. Literature on such
matters has long been stuck in dialectics between revision of intuitive
judgement about these phenomena and revision of intuitive logic. RMM promises
to unstick these many dialectics with a single, simple appeal to the
well-understood and widely recognized phenomenon of modal perspective.
Development of RMM thus promises to contribute significantly to the
enhancement of theory in contemporary metaphysics. 

A secondary contribution to knowledge creation will be a deeper understanding
of a cluster of interrelated issues in the philosophy of language, including
both a  significant advance in our theory of conditionals and the
articulation, modernization, and defense of an adequate framework for formal
theory of meaning, apt to represent both logical and pragmatic phenomena in an
intensional language. 

A pair of independent ‘trivialization’ arguments (Gibbard’s and Williamson’s)
force a choice among (i) distinguishing the conditional from the material
conditional; (ii) a semantic analysis of ‘if p’ as a standard intensional
operator; (iii) intuitive data: to wit, conformity to ‘conditional proof’, or
the order-indifference of multiple antecedents. Our best theory of the
conditional (Stalnaker’s) preserves (i) and (ii) at the expense of (iii);
while the theory is serviceable and robust, this choice stands in the way of a
full understanding of conditional reasoning. By explaining how we might
instead preserve (i) and (iii) at the expense of (ii), the proposed research
promises a significant advance on our understanding of an important area of
language and cognition.

The manoeuvre required to abandon (ii) displaces the action Stalnaker proposes
for ‘if p’ to a ‘postsemantic’ stage, posterior to the ‘semantic’ stage in
which a meaning is composed for a full sentence, but prior to the ‘pragmatic’
stage in which context-sensitive expressions are evaluated. Making room for
this intermediate stage requires considerable delicacy in the articulation of
a general framework in the theory of meaning, and while Lewis’s 1980 ‘Index,
context, and content’ advances such a framework, a modernized presentation and
defense is required for widespread recognition of the power concealed within
it.

Finally, the development of RMM promises significant opportunities for student
training at two Canadian institutions. These opportunities will positively
impact graduate recruitment at both the Manitoba and Toronto departments of
philosophy, and will further contribute to Toronto's position as a leading
centre for the investigation of perspective-relativity in language, logic, and
metaphysics. 

